---
layout: post
title: Part 8
subtitle: A complete guide on Java-to-Kotlin
categories: [programming]
tags: [java, kotlin, software-engineering]
share_request: true
subscribe_email: true
notschedule: true
---

This is the part 8 of series [Java to Kotlin - Learning Simplified](/blogs/programming/java-to-kotlin/). I hope you are learning something new from every part.

>If you have not read part 7, please do [here.](/blogs/programming/java-to-kotlin/part-7/)

{: .box-plain}
Index of this Part:  [Lambda Expression](#lambda) & [Scoped Functions](#scoped)

<p id="lambda"></p><br/><br/>

---

{: .box-plain}
### Lambda Expression 🤯 🔥

---

{: .box-bordered}
The simplest definition of lambda expression is 'A function with no name'. In java if a function is accepting an interface with 1 method, we can pass a lambda instead of an anonymous class. It is even shorter to write than anonymous class. In java, a function can not specify it needs a lambda. Let's see snippet of code.

```
	interface Logger{
		public void log();
	}

	// assume a function
	public void callLogger(Logger log){}

	callLogger(new Logger(){}) // explicit anonymous object

	callLogger(()->{}) // no arg lambda
```


💡 Kotlin changed the syntax little bit. In Kotlin, a function can expect lambda with following syntax:

```
	// Kotlin, doSomething is expecting a function which takes no input and returns Unit, block is just the placeholder

	fun doSomething(block:()->Unit) {
		block() // the function is invoked
	}
```

Now we can call the function `doSomething`:

```
	fun anotherFun(){} // accepts no arg and returns Unit

	fun performAction(){
		
		doSomething(::anotherFun)  ✅ another fun is a matching function

		doSomething({   ✅ passing a no-arg lamda

			})

		doSomething{    ✅ if lambda is last arguement, we can skip the parenthesis

		}
	}
```

In reality, Kotlin is also doing similar magic as Java does. To satisfy the needs, Kotlin standard package has a lot of interfaces, check `kotlin.jvm.functions` and the lambda is converted to instance of one of the `Function#` interface. 

```
	// Kotlin: Calling the function with explicit anonymous object

	doSomething(object : Function0<Unit>{
        override fun invoke() {

        }
    }
```

The above code is same as

```
		// Kotlin

		doSomething {

		}

		// the lambda is anonymous instance of Function0
```

### I urge you to check `package kotlin.jvm.functions`


### `Understanding concept of calling lambda and the syntax is must for the next section`

<p id="scoped"></p><br/><br/>

---

{: .box-plain}
### Scoped Functions 🤯 🤯 🔥

---

### `let, run, with, apply, and also` , [Refer Original Documentation Here](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/scope-functions.html)

{: .box-bordered}
Understanding lambda expression and syntax is a must for this section. As we saw in the last section, in Kotlin a function can declare that it is expecting a lambda and the syntax to call is funtion name followed by `{}` where `{}` is the lambda (in reality, an anonymous instace of some interface , check `Function#` as suggested above)<br/><br/>
The scoped functions are really nice utilities Kotlin offers. There are many blogs to explain them, here we will try to explain the inner working of the functions. Let's start.

```
	// Kotlin let function (simplified syntax)

	fun <T, R> T.let(block: (T) -> R): R {
	   
	    return block(this)
	}
```

👉 Here let function is defined as an `extension function` (check the syntax `T.`) to any class. It means any object can call the let with `.` as member. 

👉 The function is accepting a function which accepts one argument and returns another type. Check `Function` interface.

👉 The function accepts the caller as argument.

👉 In block(this) `this` is the caller being passed

👉 The default name of the argument passed in lambda is `it` if there is only one argument

The use of `let`

```
	// Kotlin

	val name = "Gaurav"
	name.let {
		it.length
	}

	fun safeCall(var name:String?) { // nullable
		name?.let {
			it.length // it is safe to call it inside
		}
	}
```

Let's understand what this lamda is doing.

👉 We used `name` which is String to call let, Let is expecting a lambda which accepts the same argument which is caller. In our case `name` 

👉 The default name of the argument passed to lambda is `it` if there is only one argument expected

`We can change the name of the argument passed in the Lambda`

```
	val name = "Gaurav"
	name.let { abc -> 
		abc.length
	}

```


👉 Let is expecting a lambda, in our case a String input and `R` output

👉 Kotlin is smart to deduce the type `R` with the last statement of the lambda, in our case `Int` So `R` becomes `Int`

👉 `The last statement is the return type`

```
	//	Now the return type is String

	name.let { abc -> 
		abc.length
		"Khanna"
	}
```


### Another similar scoped function is `also`

```
	// Kotlin also function (simplified syntax)

	fun <T, R> T.also(block: (T) -> R): R {
	   
	    block(this)
	    return this
	}
```

### The only difference is it returns `this` which means the caller object itself and not the lambda result


#### Before we proceed further and see other scoped functions, I want to introduce a `special syntax with Lambda`

```
	// Kotlin

	fun<T> lambdaSample(block: T.()->Unit){

	}
```

🤯 🔥 In the above snippet, the function is expecting a lambda inside the type `T`. It means it can not invoke `block()` without instance of type `T`. As this lambda is supposed to be member of the `T` you can refer the calling instance as `this` inside the lambda. You can think Kotlin has added an extension function of signature lambda expects in the `Type T` if it helps.


```
    fun <T> lambdaWithCaller(obj: T, block: T.() -> Unit) {
        obj.block()
    }

    // call sample:

    val name = "Gaurav"
    Singleton.lambdaWithCaller<String>(name) {
        val lengthOfString = length  ✅ implicit call to member

        val lengthOfString1 = this.length ✅ explicit call to member
    }
```
*Note: in the snippet above we called `length` inside lambda because length is member of the String class*

### `run` scoped function

```
	// Kotlin

	fun <T, R> T.run(block: T.() -> R): R {
		return block()
	}
```

{: .box-bordered}
The `run` function is defined as extension function to any class (`T.`) and it accepts the lambda under member of the caller `T.()`. It calls the block and returns the lambda result. You can use the caller as `this` inside lambda.

```
	// Kotlin

	fun <R> run(block: () -> R): R {
		return block()
	}
```

{:. box-bordered}
This is another variant of the run function. It does not need a caller, all it needs is a lambda as argument and it returns the almbda result

### `apply` scoped function

```
	// Kotlin
	fun <T> T.apply(block: T.() -> Unit): T {
		block()
		return this
	}
```

{: .box-bordered}
The `apply` function is also defined as extensiion function `T.` and it accepts the lambda under member of the caller `T.()`. It calls the block but does not return the result.It returns the caller itself.


### `also` scoped function

```
	// Kotlin
	fun <T> T.also(block: (T) -> Unit): T {
		block(this)
		return this
	}
```

{: .box-bordered}
The `also` function is defined as an extension function `T.` and it accepts a normal one arg lambda. It calls the lambda and passes the caller as argument. That's why the argument caller can be accessed as `it` inside the lambda. `also` returns the caller itself.

### `with` scoped function

```
	// Kotlin
	fun <T, R> with(receiver: T, block: T.() -> R): R {
		return receiver.block()
	}
```

{: .box-bordered}
`with` function is not extenstion function, so it does not need any reference caller. Any object call call it as static. It accepts the lambda under member of the caller `T.()`. It calls the lambda and returns the result. The receiver object passed is avaialable as `this` inside the lambda.

{: .box-plain}
The above explanation is to tell you what is happening under the hood. I recommend reading [the official documentation](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/scope-functions.html) and more blogs on this topic. Note: there is a table [Function selection](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/scope-functions.html#function-selection) in the end of official docs, it is very useful.



---

{: .box-plain}
### Summary

---

{: .box-bordered}
This part might seem difficult to grasp at first sight. We covered `lambda expressions`, and `scoped functions`. This is very important topic in Kotlin. Kindly read again if you have doubts. 

{: .box-plain}
### 🔥 [Hope you learned something, This part was 🤯Kotlin🤯. Here is part 9](/blogs/programming/java-to-kotlin/part-9/)