---
layout: post
title: Part 1
subtitle: What and Why? Java-to-Kotlin
categories: [programming]
tags: [java, kotlin, software-engineering]
share_request: true
subscribe_email: true
notschedule: true
---

This is the part 1 of series [Java to Kotlin - Learning Simplified](/blogs/programming/java-to-kotlin/). This part is to answer one simple question, **Why Kotlin?** I hope you learn something new from every part. If you are already convinced why do you need Kotlin and want to jump into code, [check Part 2](/blogs/programming/java-to-kotlin/part-2/)

[Java was officially launched in 1995](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_version_history) and it has matured a lot since then. No doubt, Java has its fair share in programming language world and it has always been among most popular languages around. Why would someone come up with a new language interoperable with java, close to Java and claim it is better!

[Jetbrains](https://www.jetbrains.com), behind a very famous IDE [IntelliJ](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/) is the force behind Kotlin. They used to write a lot of code in Java and felt need of change. 

>A couple of pain points they felt:
<br/><br/> 👉 Java is verbose which is good to some extent but many times developers spend time writing boilerplate code OR a code which could easily be taken care by Compiler
<br/><br/> 👉 Java has notion of *null* which is a pain. They thought can a compiler be smart to figure out nulls and help developers rather than punishing them at runtime
<br/><br/> 👉 Can we create a smarter language on top of Java principles which is high level in true sense. It means to learn from the mistakes of existing Java codebase, ask developers what they want to improve and create powerful utilities+features in the language
<br/><br/> 👉 Can a language be focused on the problem solving aspect rather than trivial things like where to put curly braces
<br/><br/> 👉 Last but not the least, can we develop a language which is 100% interoperable with Java. It means both the languages should be able to call each other without a slight friction
<br/><br/> 👉 and few more...

#### ..And that's how Kotlin was born. A language conceptulized by an IDE company to solve their own pain points. Later, developers realized they were also having these pains but never realized because no one pointed and there was not a better solution. Google also supports Kotlin officially in Android.

{: .box-plain}
🔥 **Fun Fact**: Kotlin was named after an [Island in Russia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kotlin_Island)

Initially you might not like Kotlin syntax and ideology. The reason behind is not that Kotlin is bad or good, but it is that your mind does not like change. It gets comfortable and considers change as friction. Read all the parts and check all the examples before you conclude. Keep an open mind is the secret of growth.

**Glimpse of Kotlin Flavor**<br/>
Kotlin has many smart offerings, one of my favourite is **SmartCast by Smart Compiler**.

In **Java** if you need to use the subclass method, you need to check instance of at runtime and explicitly cast. You use following code:

```
if(obj instanceof SubClass) {
	((SubClass)obj).callSubClassMethod(); // explicitcast 👎
}
```
<br/>
However, In **Kotlin** there is smartcast, The compiler is smart enough to know whether an explicit cast is requried or not. e.g
```
if(obj is SubClass) {
	obj.callSubClassMethod() // smartcast 👍
}
```

{: .box-plain}
📝 Note: The Kotlin compiler smart casted the `obj` to `SubClass` because it knows the code will be executed only if `instanceof` check is passed. We use `is` keyword to check `instanceof` in Kotlin. It is a very subtle example to show power of Kotlin. 

### 3 core Principles
We will discuss these 3 principles in our series: **Concise**, **Smart** and **Powerful**.
If you were Kotlin developers, how will you make anything in java concise OR smart OR powerful. For every question, you have to come up with an answer and match your answer with Kotlin way.

Think how will you apply these 3 priciples in our Casting example. I personally believe smart cast is better than explicit cast. I used to think I am trading readibility with concise code but it varies from use case to use case. My suggestion in casting example is, if you are using the subclass method immediately after `instanceof` check, you do not need explicit cast, if you are using somewhere down in the if block, you are free to cast explicitly. Kotlin does not stop you, it empowers you. 

***Explicit Cast Example***
```
	if(obj is SubClass){
        var subIbj:SubClass = obj
	}

        OR

	var subObj:SubClass = obj as SubClass
```

## Summary
Kotlin is developed with a mindset to give wings to Java programmers. If Java is compiled, Kotlin is smartly compiled. It is modern and 3 core principles we will be focusing  are **Concise, Smart and Powerful**. Small things like `smartcast` make difference in large projects. Lesser you type, lesser code is to be maintained. Spend time and energy in solving your business problem.

It is possible that you do not face any issues with Java like Jetbrains did. It is also possible that you are not going to like Kotlin (though the likelihood is less). Needless to say, it is a language designed from ground up in 21st century and definitely a good tool to have in your toolbox. Plus the possibility of mixing it with Java code enables you to try as per your own convenience. My suggestion is to give it a shot and make an informed decision.

{: .box-plain}
### [Let's jump into real code and see the difference between Java and Kotlin. Here is part 2.](/blogs/programming/java-to-kotlin/part-2/)

